Assignment Choice 2 – Trip Fare Estimation 
Description: 
You are a newly recruited data science team member for Gett, New York City branch, and the 
company is undergoing a challenging period since it only recently entered the ride-sharing market in 
NYC and is still “learning” the market and how it functions in order to tailor its business operations 
effectively to the people and userbase in NYC. 
In your first week at work, your manager called you in for an urgent meeting with the Marketplace 
team head. Once you went into the meeting room with them and sat down, your manager said 
“Hope you took your DSMA course during your Bachelor’s degree at BGU, you’re going to need to 
use everything that you learned to get us through this difficult period” and handed you a 3 page 
document that lists the business question which the team urgently needs investigated. It reads as 
follows: 
What is the trip’s total fare amount estimate we must project to the app’s user?  If we overcharge, 
Gett’s passengers won’t book the ride. If we undercharge, our drivers will protest.  
a. Input – PULocationID, DOLocationID, trip_distance, Time of day, Day of week 
b. Output (target variable) – total_fare_amount (total_amount – tip_amount) 
c. The challenge: unlike the trip_duration prediction problem, total_amount prediction 
is highly sensitive to all the values that are added up for the fare. This problem will 
require a significant amount of feature engineering to get high accuracy and low 
error rates. 
i. Extensive Feature Engineering - You will need to think how to model all the 
different values that are a part of the total_fare_amount before the trip has 
occurred.  
1. Go through the data dictionary for the problem to understand how 
total_amount is calculated.  
2. Understand that none of the money related features from the 
dataset are provided as part of the input since the business usecase 
that you are building here is trip fare estimate – which means you 
inform the users of the Gett Application how much their trip is likely 
to cost before they press the “book taxi” button. (you’re only 
providing an estimate) 
3. Therefore, all the features like whether there is a 
congestion_surcharge, etc.  as part of the total_amount will have to 
be calculated using other data that is available to you (mentioned in 
a. Input above) at inference time as part of your feature 
engineering.  
4. You may also need to use external data that is not present within the 
dataset (by explore the NYC TLC website in order to understand how 
surcharges are calculated, etc.) 
5. Approximate those values and use the values in the dataset to see if 
your logic at approximating those values are working well. Try 
searching for fare rules in the NYC TLC website and build the feature 
engineering pipe accordingly (domain – based features)   
ii. Handle outliers – you need to be thorough with your data cleaning and 
validation before you begin working with the data. (check for errors like 
negative fares)   
d. Build a simple Streamlit UI for the purpose of showcasing how your final model(s) 
predict the total_fare_amount of a trip – have a few input boxes for each of the 
inputs and a button which says “book taxi”. The UI should display a map that shows a 
point to point trip with an overlay displaying how much the customer will probably 
be charged for their trip.  
e. Data use constraints: You may use the data over 2024 and 2025 as you wish, but 
reserve 2026 data specifically for evaluating and demonstrating how your model 
performs. (Do not include 2026 data in your training set.)  
 
After staring at this document with beads of sweat forming on your forehead, you turn to leave the 
meeting room, when the Marketplace team head laughs and remarks “Thankfully, the municipality of 
New York has open sourced its historical data on traditional taxi rides in the city. There should be 
more than enough data in those data dumps that we can analyse to answer these questions.” You 
run quickly to your laptop and run a search online to find these datasets and discover the following:   
Dataset: 
NYC – TLC (year of 2024 and 2025, and JAN + FEB of 2026) – can be downloaded from here - 
https://www.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page 
Use only the “Yellow Taxi Trip Records” datasets from 2024, 2025 and the first two months of 2026. 
Data Dictionary: 
Can be found here - 
https://www.nyc.gov/assets/tlc/downloads/pdf/data_dictionary_trip_records_yellow.pdf  
And the Taxi Zone Lookup Table can be found here: 
https://d37ci6vzurychx.cloudfront.net/misc/taxi_zone_lookup.csv  
Use of AI: 
Permitted, but please put in a little effort to understand the code that is generated (and to check if it 
is correct / useful for what you wish you achieve) before you use it in the project. 
 
Evaluation Criteria: 
1. Completeness (20%) – the extent to which the machine learning pipeline was built for 
answering this business question. 
2. Effectiveness of EDA (20%) – How well you explored the data to find the initial insights in the 
data that allowed you to work effectively with the data. 
3. Innovation (20%) – be creative with your feature engineering and model development 
4. Modularity of the Code (20%) – Make the codebase that you build for this assignment 
modular and readable. One of the goals of this course is to highlight how modularity of the 
codebase makes it much simpler to maintain and work with (especially when working in 
teams). 
5. Performance (10%) – how well your model(s) work over the test set (you score 10/10 here if 
you beat the lecturer’s model). 
6. Use of Experiment Tracking (10%) – In the course, we use Weights & Biases (wandb) for the 
purpose of experiment tracking. I strongly encourage using experiment tracking when 
running your experiments (for the purpose of hyperparameter tuning using sweeps, for 
running evaluations of your models before and after you make changes to your features in 
order to see what works, and to also work with model and data versioning (as we will see in 
Lecture 4))   
Assignment Submission format: 
You are expected to submit 3 files: 
1. A python notebook that you developed for performing the EDA that the lecturer can run 
over the training data (2024 + 2025 combined)  
2. A zip folder containing the entire codebase you developed for the machine learning pipeline 
which the lecturer can execute that will run everything needed for the pipeline to work from 
start to finish. Training data – 2024 + 2025, Test Data – Jan + Feb of 2026 
 (include a text file containing instructions to execute the code if you feel it’s needed)  
 
3. A PDF report summarizing the following: 
a. Your key findings from the EDA connecting it to the business problem that you are 
trying to solve for. (e.g., Airport rides seem to have a bump in total_amount since 
the fare there is fixed.)  
b. A short explanation of the final selected set of features that you engineered   
c. A short explanation of how you performed model selection and hyperparameter 
tuning 
d. A short explanation of the model improvement loops that you did (error analysis of 
your model + drift detection and mitigation)  
e. A link to your experiment tracking page on wandb (within the same wandb team that 
you have joined for the course. You can open a new project for yourself.)  
 
 
 